 **注：** 本译文作者为赵振华。投稿声明详见关联issue：<https://gitee.com/OpenAtomFoundation/legal-license-translation/issues/I5U3TL> 译文系原样复制于：<https://github.com/zRich/gpl/blob/main/lgplv3/lgplv3.md>

# GNU LESSER GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE

# GNU 宽松通用公共许可证

Version 2.1, February 1999

第2.1版 1999年2月

Copyright (C) 1991, 1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301  USA

版权所有 (C) 2007年 自由软件基金会
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301  USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

任何人都可以复制和发布本许可证的完整副本，但不允许修改。

[This is the first released version of the Lesser GPL.  It also counts
as the successor of the GNU Library Public License, version 2, hence
the version number 2.1.]

（这是宽松通用公共许可证的首次发布。因把之前发布GNU通用公共许可证的版本——第2版计算在内，所以版本为2.1。）

### Preamble

### 引言

The licenses for most software are designed to take away your freedom
to share and change it. By contrast, the GNU General Public Licenses
are intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free
software--to make sure the software is free for all its users.

就多数软件而言，许可证被设计用于剥夺你分享和修改软件的自由。相反，GNU通用公共许可证力图保障你分享和修改某程序全部版本的权利——确保自由软件对其用户来说是自由的。我们——自由软件基金会——将GNU通用公共许可证用于我们的大多数软件，并为一些其他作品的作者效仿。你也可以将本许可证用于你的程序。

This license, the Lesser General Public License, applies to some
specially designated software packages--typically libraries--of the
Free Software Foundation and other authors who decide to use it. You
can use it too, but we suggest you first think carefully about whether
this license or the ordinary General Public License is the better
strategy to use in any particular case, based on the explanations
below.

本许可证——宽松通用许可证是为软件包——最典型的是库——专门设计的，自由软件基金会和其他作者决定采用它。你也可以采用，但是我们建议你根据下午的解释，仔细思考本许可证还是通用公共许可证哪个更适合你采用。

When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom of use,
not price. Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that
you have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge
for this service if you wish); that you receive source code or can get
it if you want it; that you can change the software and use pieces of
it in new free programs; and that you are informed that you can do
these things.

所谓自由软件，强调自由，而非免费。设计GNU通用公共许可证的目的在于确保你享有分发自由软件的自由（你可以为此服务收费），确保你可以在需要的时候获得cd这些软件的源代码，确保你可以修改这些软件或者在新的自由软件中复用其中某些片段，并且确保你在这方面享有知情权。

To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid
distributors to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender these
rights. These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for
you if you distribute copies of the library or if you modify it.

为了保护你的权利，我们设置了一些限制以防止其他人否定你的权利或者要求你放弃你的权利。这些限制在你分发或者修改这些软件时会成为你的责任。

For example, if you distribute copies of the library, whether gratis
or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that we gave
you. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source
code. If you link other code with the library, you must provide
complete object files to the recipients, so that they can relink them
with the library after making changes to the library and recompiling
it. And you must show them these terms so they know their rights.

例如，你分发这类软件的副本，无论是收费或者免费，你必须授予接收者你拥有的所有权利。你必须保证他们也能收到或者能够获得源代码。
如果你将本库链接到其他代码，你必须向接受者提供所有目标文件，以让他们修改本库之后也能重新链接和编译。并且你也要确保他们也知道他们的权利。

We protect your rights with a two-step method: (1) we copyright the
library, and (2) we offer you this license, which gives you legal
permission to copy, distribute and/or modify the library.

我们通过两个步骤保障你的权利：（1）声明本库的版权；（2）通过本许可证授予你合法地复制、分发和修改该软件的权利。

To protect each distributor, we want to make it very clear that there
is no warranty for the free library. Also, if the library is modified
by someone else and passed on, the recipients should know that what
they have is not the original version, so that the original author's
reputation will not be affected by problems that might be introduced
by others.

为了保护每位分发者，我们明确声明：本库没有品质担保。另外，如果某人修改和发送本库，接受者应该明白这不是原始版本，因此其他人引入的问题不应该影响原作者的声誉。

Finally, software patents pose a constant threat to the existence of
any free program. We wish to make sure that a company cannot
effectively restrict the users of a free program by obtaining a
restrictive license from a patent holder. Therefore, we insist that
any patent license obtained for a version of the library must be
consistent with the full freedom of use specified in this license.

最后，软件专利持续地威胁着每个自由程序。我们希望确保公司不能通过从专利持有人那里获得限制性许可来有效地限制免费程序的用户。 因此，我们坚持认为，为某个版本的库获得的任何专利许可必须与该许可中规定的完全自由使用相一致。

Most GNU software, including some libraries, is covered by the
ordinary GNU General Public License. This license, the GNU Lesser
General Public License, applies to certain designated libraries, and
is quite different from the ordinary General Public License. We use
this license for certain libraries in order to permit linking those
libraries into non-free programs.

大多数 GNU 软件，包括一些库，都采用普通 GNU 通用公共许可证。 该许可证，即 GNU 宽松通用公共许可证，适用于某些指定的库，与普通通用公共许可证有很大不同。 我们对某些库使用此许可证，以便允许将这些库链接到非自由程序中。

When a program is linked with a library, whether statically or using a
shared library, the combination of the two is legally speaking a
combined work, a derivative of the original library. The ordinary
General Public License therefore permits such linking only if the
entire combination fits its criteria of freedom. The Lesser General
Public License permits more lax criteria for linking other code with
the library.

当程序与库链接时，无论是静态链接还是使用共享库，两者的结合在法律上都是组合作品，是原始库的衍生作品。因此，只有当整个组合符合其自由标准时，普通通用公共许可证才允许此类链接。 宽松许可证允许更宽松的标准来将其他代码与库链接。

We call this license the "Lesser" General Public License because it
does Less to protect the user's freedom than the ordinary General
Public License. It also provides other free software developers Less
of an advantage over competing non-free programs. These disadvantages
are the reason we use the ordinary General Public License for many
libraries. However, the Lesser license provides advantages in certain
special circumstances.

我们称此许可证为“宽松”通用公共许可证，因为它比普通通用公共许可证更能宽松地保护用户的自由。它还为其他自由软件开发人员提供了比竞争性非自由程序更少的优势。这些缺点是我们对许多库使用普通公共许可证的原因。但是，较宽松的许可在某些特殊情况下提供了优势。

For example, on rare occasions, there may be a special need to
encourage the widest possible use of a certain library, so that it
becomes a de-facto standard. To achieve this, non-free programs must
be allowed to use the library. A more frequent case is that a free
library does the same job as widely used non-free libraries. In this
case, there is little to gain by limiting the free library to free
software only, so we use the Lesser General Public License.

例如，在极少数情况下，可能特别需要鼓励尽可能广泛地使用某个库，以便它成为事实上的标准。为此，必须允许非自由程序使用本库。更常见的情况是免费库与广泛使用的非免费库做同样的工作。在这种情况下，将免费库仅限于免费软件几乎没有什么好处，因此我们使用较宽松的通用公共许可证。

In other cases, permission to use a particular library in non-free
programs enables a greater number of people to use a large body of
free software. For example, permission to use the GNU C Library in
non-free programs enables many more people to use the whole GNU
operating system, as well as its variant, the GNU/Linux operating
system.

在其他情况下，允许以非自由方式使用特定库程序使更多的人能够使用大量的免费软件。 例如，在非自由程序中使用 GNU C 库的许可使更多人能够使用整个 GNU 操作系统及其变体 GNU/Linux 操作系统。

Although the Lesser General Public License is Less protective of the
users' freedom, it does ensure that the user of a program that is
linked with the Library has the freedom and the wherewithal to run
that program using a modified version of the Library.

尽管较宽松的通用公共许可证对用户自由的保护较少，但它确实确保与库链接的程序的用户拥有使用库的修改版本运行该程序的自由和手段。

The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow. Pay close attention to the difference between a
"work based on the library" and a "work that uses the library". The
former contains code derived from the library, whereas the latter must
be combined with the library in order to run.

复制、分发和修改的具体条款和条件修改如下。请密切注意“基于库的作品”和“使用库的作品”之间的区别。前者包含从库派生的代码，而后者必须与库结合才能运行。

### TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION

### 复制、分发和修改的条款和条件

**0.** This License Agreement applies to any software library or other
program which contains a notice placed by the copyright holder or
other authorized party saying it may be distributed under the terms of
this Lesser General Public License (also called "this License"). Each
licensee is addressed as "you".

**0.** 本许可协议适用于任何软件库或其他包含版权持有人或其他授权方放置的声明的程序，声明它可以根据此较宽松的通用公共许可证（也称为“此许可证”）的条款分发。每个被许可人都被称为“你”。

A "library" means a collection of software functions and/or data
prepared so as to be conveniently linked with application programs
(which use some of those functions and data) to form executables.

“库”是指软件功能和/或数据的集合准备以便与应用程序（使用其中一些功能和数据）方便地链接以形成可执行文件。

The "Library", below, refers to any such software library or work
which has been distributed under these terms. A "work based on the
Library" means either the Library or any derivative work under
copyright law: that is to say, a work containing the Library or a
portion of it, either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated
straightforwardly into another language. (Hereinafter, translation is
included without limitation in the term "modification".)

下面的“库”是指任何根据这些条款分发此类软件库或作品。“基于库的作品”是指库或版权法规定的任何衍生作品：也就是说，包含库或其一部分的作品，无论是逐字还是修改和/或直接翻译成另一种语言。 下文中，翻译包括但不限于术语“修改”。）

"Source code" for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modifications to it. For a library, complete source code means
all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any associated
interface definition files, plus the scripts used to control
compilation and installation of the library.

作品的“源代码”是指对作品进行修改的首选形式。对于一个库，完整的源代码是指它包含的所有模块的所有源代码，加上任何相关的接口定义文件，加上用于控制库的编译和安装的脚本。

Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not
covered by this License; they are outside its scope. The act of
running a program using the Library is not restricted, and output from
such a program is covered only if its contents constitute a work based
on the Library (independent of the use of the Library in a tool for
writing it). Whether that is true depends on what the Library does and
what the program that uses the Library does.

本许可证不包括复制、分发和修改以外的行为；它们不在本许可证范围内。 使用库运行程序的行为不受限制，并且仅当其内容构成基于库的作品（独立于在编写它的工具中使用库）时，此类程序的输出才包含在内。 这是否正确取决于库的作用以及使用本库的程序的作用。

**1.** You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Library's
complete source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that
you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an
appropriate copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact
all the notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any
warranty; and distribute a copy of this License along with the
Library.

**1.**　你可以在介质上逐字复制和分发库收到的完整源代码，前提是你在每个副本上明显且适当地发布适当的版权声明和免责声明；保留所有涉及本许可证和不存在任何保证的通知； 随本库一起分发本许可证的副本。

You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and
you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a
fee.

你可以对传输副本的实际行为收取费用，并且你可以选择提供担保以换取费用。

**2.** You may modify your copy or copies of the Library or any
portion of it, thus forming a work based on the Library, and copy and
distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1
above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:

**２.**　你可以修改你的库或其任何部分的一个或多个副本，从而形成基于库的作品，并根据上文第 1 条的条款复制和分发此类修改或作品，前提是你还满足所有这些条件 :

- **a)** The modified work must itself be a software library.

- **a)** 被修改的作品本身必须是一个软件库。

- **b)** You must cause the files modified to carry prominent
    notices stating that you changed the files and the date of
    any change.

- **b)** 你必须在修改的文件中添加明显的声明，说明你更改的文件和日期。

- **c)** You must cause the whole of the work to be licensed at no
    charge to all third parties under the terms of this License.

- **c)** 你必须根据本许可证免费地向所有第三方免费许可整个作品。

- **d)** If a facility in the modified Library refers to a function
    or a table of data to be supplied by an application program that
    uses the facility, other than as an argument passed when the
    facility is invoked, then you must make a good faith effort to
    ensure that, in the event an application does not supply such
    function or table, the facility still operates, and performs
    whatever part of its purpose remains meaningful.

- **d)** 如果修改后的库中的功能引用由使用该功能的应用程序提供的函数或数据，而不是作为调用该功能时传递的参数，那么你必须真诚地努力确保 如果应用程序不提供此功能或数据，该功能仍能执行并且获得有意义的结果。

    (For example, a function in a library to compute square roots has
    a purpose that is entirely well-defined independent of
    the application. Therefore, Subsection 2d requires that any
    application-supplied function or table used by this function must
    be optional: if the application does not supply it, the square
    root function must still compute square roots.)

    （例如，库中计算平方根的函数有一个完全明确定义的独立于应用程序的目的。 因此，第2条d款要求任何应用程序提供的函数或此函数使用的数据必须是可选的：如果应用程序不提供它，平方根函数仍必须计算平方根。）

These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole. If
identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Library,
and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in
themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those
sections when you distribute them as separate works. But when you
distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based
on the Library, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of
this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the
entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote
it.

这些要求适用于整个修改后的作品。 如果该作品的可识别部分不是来自本库，并且可以合理地认为它们本身是独立和单独的作品，那么当你将它们作为独立作品分发时，本许可证及其条款不适用于这些部分。 但是，当你将相同的部分作为基于本库的作品的整体的一部分进行分发时，整体的分发必须遵守本许可证的条款，其对其他被许可人的许可扩展到整个整体，从而扩展到每个和每一部分，不管是谁写的。

Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest
your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to
exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or
collective works based on the Library.

因此，本条的目的不是声明你的权利或者与由你编写的作品的权利抗辩； 相反，目的是行使控制衍生品发行或发行的权利基于本库的集体作品。

In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Library
with the Library (or with a work based on the Library) on a volume of
a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under
the scope of this License.

此外，仅将不基于本库的另一作品与本库（或基于本库的作品）聚合在存储或分发介质上不会使其他作品处于本许可证的范围内。

**3.** You may opt to apply the terms of the ordinary GNU General
Public License instead of this License to a given copy of the Library.
To do this, you must alter all the notices that refer to this License,
so that they refer to the ordinary GNU General Public License, version
2, instead of to this License. (If a newer version than version 2 of
the ordinary GNU General Public License has appeared, then you can
specify that version instead if you wish.) Do not make any other
change in these notices.

**3.** 你可以选择将普通GNU通用公共许可证的条款而不是本许可证的条款应用于库的给定副本。为此，你必须更改所有引用此许可证的声明，以便它们引用普通的GNU通用公共许可证第2版，而不是本许可证。（如果出现了比普通GNU通用公共许可证第2版更新的版本，那么你可以根据需要指定该版本。）不要对这些通知进行任何其他更改。

Once this change is made in a given copy, it is irreversible for that
copy, so the ordinary GNU General Public License applies to all
subsequent copies and derivative works made from that copy.

一旦在给定的副本中进行了此更改，则该更改是不可逆的副本，所以普通的GNU通用公共许可证适用于所有从该副本制作的后续副本和衍生作品。

This option is useful when you wish to copy part of the code of the
Library into a program that is not a library.

当你希望复制本库的部分代码到一个程序而不是库中时，该选项很有用。

**4.** You may copy and distribute the Library (or a portion or
derivative of it, under Section 2) in object code or executable form
under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you accompany
it with the complete corresponding machine-readable source code, which
must be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a
medium customarily used for software interchange.

你可以根据上文第1条和第2条的条款以目标代码或可执行形式复制和分发本库（或根据第2条要求其部分或衍生品），前提是你随附完整的相应机器可读源代码， 必须根据上文第1条和第2条的条款在通常用于软件交换的介质上分发。

If distribution of object code is made by offering access to copy from
a designated place, then offering equivalent access to copy the source
code from the same place satisfies the requirement to distribute the
source code, even though third parties are not compelled to copy the
source along with the object code.

如果目标代码的分发是通过提供从指定位置复制的访问权限进行的，那么提供同一地址复制源代码的等效访问权限满足分发源代码的要求，即使第三方没有被迫复制源代码连同目标代码。

**5.** A program that contains no derivative of any portion of the
Library, but is designed to work with the Library by being compiled or
linked with it, is called a "work that uses the Library". Such a work,
in isolation, is not a derivative work of the Library, and therefore
falls outside the scope of this License.

不包含本库的任何部分的衍生程序，但被设计为通过编译或链接与本库一起工作的程序，称为“使用本库的作品”。 这样的作品，单独来看，不是本库的衍生作品，因此不属于本许可的范围。

However, linking a "work that uses the Library" with the Library
creates an executable that is a derivative of the Library (because it
contains portions of the Library), rather than a "work that uses the
library". The executable is therefore covered by this License. Section
6 states terms for distribution of such executables.

但是，将“使用本库的作品”与本库链接会创建一个可执行文件，该可执行文件是本库的衍生品（因为它包含本库的部分），而不是“使用本库的作品”。 因此，可执行文件包含在本许可证中。 第6条规定了此类可执行文件的分发条款。

When a "work that uses the Library" uses material from a header file
that is part of the Library, the object code for the work may be a
derivative work of the Library even though the source code is not.
Whether this is true is especially significant if the work can be
linked without the Library, or if the work is itself a library. The
threshold for this to be true is not precisely defined by law.

当“使用本库的作品”使用作为本库一部分的头文件中的材料时，作品的目标代码可能是本库的衍生品，即使源代码不是。 如果作品可以在没有本库的情况下链接，或者作品本身就是一个库，那么这是否属实尤其重要。 法律并未明确规定这一点的门槛。

If such an object file uses only numerical parameters, data structure
layouts and accessors, and small macros and small inline functions
(ten lines or less in length), then the use of the object file is
unrestricted, regardless of whether it is legally a derivative work.
(Executables containing this object code plus portions of the Library
will still fall under Section 6.)

如果这样的目标文件仅使用数值参数、数据结构布局和访问器以及小型宏和小型内联函数（长度不超过10行），则目标文件的使用不受限制，无论它是否合法衍生品。 （包含此目标代码和部分库的可执行文件仍在第6条涵盖范围内。）

Otherwise, if the work is a derivative of the Library, you may
distribute the object code for the work under the terms of Section 6.
Any executables containing that work also fall under Section 6,
whether or not they are linked directly with the Library itself.

否则，如果作品是本库的衍生品，你可以根据第6条的条款分发作品的目标代码。包含该作品的任何可执行文件也属于第6条的涵盖范围，无论它们是否直接链接到库本身。

**6.** As an exception to the Sections above, you may also combine or
link a "work that uses the Library" with the Library to produce a work
containing portions of the Library, and distribute that work under
terms of your choice, provided that the terms permit modification of
the work for the customer's own use and reverse engineering for
debugging such modifications.

作为上文部分的例外情况，你还可以将“使用本库的作品”与库组合或链接以生成包含本库部分的作品，并根据你选择的条款分发该作品，前提是条款允许修改作品供客户自己使用，以及为了调试等进行逆向工程。

You must give prominent notice with each copy of the work that the
Library is used in it and that the Library and its use are covered by
this License. You must supply a copy of this License. If the work
during execution displays copyright notices, you must include the
copyright notice for the Library among them, as well as a reference
directing the user to the copy of this License. Also, you must do one
of these things:

你必须在使用了本库的作品的每份副本中显着声明使用了本库，并且使用本库受本许可证的约束。 你必须提供本许可证的副本。 如果执行过程中的作品显示版权声明，你必须在其中包含本库的版权声明，以及将用户引导至本许可证副本的参考。另外，你必须做下列之一：

- **a)** Accompany the work with the complete corresponding
    machine-readable source code for the Library including whatever
    changes were used in the work (which must be distributed under
    Sections 1 and 2 above); and, if the work is an executable linked
    with the Library, with the complete machine-readable "work that
    uses the Library", as object code and/or source code, so that the
    user can modify the Library and then relink to produce a modified
    executable containing the modified Library. (It is understood that
    the user who changes the contents of definitions files in the
    Library will not necessarily be able to recompile the application
    to use the modified definitions.)

- **a)** 随作品附上本库完整的相应机器可读源代码，包括作品中使用的任何更改（必须根据上文第1条和第2条条款分发）； 并且，如果作品是与库链接的可执行文件，则带有完整的机器可读“使用本库的作品”，作为目标代码和/或源代码，以便用户可以修改库，然后重新链接以生成包含修改后的库的修改后的可执行文件。 （需要理解，更改本库中定义文件内容的用户不一定能够重新编译应用程序以使用修改后的定义。）

- **b)** Use a suitable shared library mechanism for linking with
    the Library. A suitable mechanism is one that (1) uses at run time
    a copy of the library already present on the user's computer
    system, rather than copying library functions into the executable,
    and (2) will operate properly with a modified version of the
    library, if the user installs one, as long as the modified version
    is interface-compatible with the version that the work was
    made with.

- **b)** 使用合适的共享库机制与库链接。 一种合适的机制是 (1) 在运行时使用用户计算机系统上已经存在的本库的副本，而不是将库函数复制到可执行文件中，并且 (2) 将使用修改后的库版本正常运行， 如果用户安装一个，只要修改后的版本与制作作品的版本接口兼容。

- **c)** Accompany the work with a written offer, valid for at least
    three years, to give the same user the materials specified in
    Subsection 6a, above, for a charge no more than the cost of
    performing this distribution.

- **c)** 随作品附上至少3年有效的书面报价，以向同一用户提供上文第6条a款中指定的材料，费用不超过执行此分发的成本。

- **d)** If distribution of the work is made by offering access to
    copy from a designated place, offer equivalent access to copy the
    above specified materials from the same place.

- **d)** 如果通过提供从指定位置访问副本来分发作品，则提供从同一位置复制上文指定材料的等效访问权限。

- **e)** Verify that the user has already received a copy of these
    materials or that you have already sent this user a copy.

- **e)** 确认用户已经收到这些材料的副本，或者你已经向该用户发送了一份副本。

For an executable, the required form of the "work that uses the
Library" must include any data and utility programs needed for
reproducing the executable from it. However, as a special exception,
the materials to be distributed need not include anything that is
normally distributed (in either source or binary form) with the major
components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the operating system on
which the executable runs, unless that component itself accompanies
the executable.

对于可执行文件，“使用本库的作品”的要求形式必须包括从中复制可执行文件所需的任何数据和实用程序。然而，作为一个特殊的例外，要分发的材料不需要包括通常分发的任何内容（以源代码或二进制形式）与运行可执行文件的操作系统的主要组件（编译器、内核等），除非该组件本身伴随着可执行文件。

It may happen that this requirement contradicts the license
restrictions of other proprietary libraries that do not normally
accompany the operating system. Such a contradiction means you cannot
use both them and the Library together in an executable that you
distribute.

此要求可能会与操作系统通常不附带的其他专有库的许可限制相矛盾。这种矛盾意味着你不能在分发的可执行文件中同时使用它们和库。

**7.** You may place library facilities that are a work based on the
Library side-by-side in a single library together with other library
facilities not covered by this License, and distribute such a combined
library, provided that the separate distribution of the work based on
the Library and of the other library facilities is otherwise
permitted, and provided that you do these two things:

**7.** 你可以将基于本库的作品的库功能与本许可证未涵盖的其他库功能并排放置在一个库中，并分发这样一个库的组合，前提是单独分发基于本库的作品酷和其他库功能是被允许的，前提是做的下列2项：

- **a)** Accompany the combined library with a copy of the same work
    based on the Library, uncombined with any other
    library facilities. This must be distributed under the terms of
    the Sections above.

- **a)** 将基于本库的相同作品的副本与合并的库一起提供，但不与任何其他库功能合并。 同时，必须根据上文的条款进行分发。

- **b)** Give prominent notice with the combined library of the fact
    that part of it is a work based on the Library, and explaining
    where to find the accompanying uncombined form of the same work.

- **b)** 对组合库给予显着通知，说明它的一部分是基于本库的作品，并说明在哪里可以找到同一作品的附带未组合形式。

**8.** You may not copy, modify, sublicense, link with, or distribute
the Library except as expressly provided under this License. Any
attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, link with, or
distribute the Library is void, and will automatically terminate your
rights under this License. However, parties who have received copies,
or rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses
terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance.

**8.** 除非本许可明确规定，否则你不得复制、修改、再许可、链接或分发本库。 任何以其他方式复制、修改、再许可、链接或分发库的尝试都是无效的，并将自动终止你在本许可下的权利。 但是，根据本许可从你那里收到副本或权利的各方只要完全合规，其许可就不会被终止。

**9.** You are not required to accept this License, since you have not
signed it. However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or
distribute the Library or its derivative works. These actions are
prohibited by law if you do not accept this License. Therefore, by
modifying or distributing the Library (or any work based on the
Library), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and
all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying
the Library or works based on it.

**9.** 你没有签署本许可证，你也不需要接受它。 但是，除此之外，没有别的方式授予你修改或分发库或其衍生作品的权利。 如果你不接受本许可，这些行为将被法律禁止。因此，通过修改或分发库（或基于库的任何作品），即表示你接受此许可以及复制、分发或修改库或基于库的作品的所有条款和条件。

**10.** Each time you redistribute the Library (or any work based on
the Library), the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensor to copy, distribute, link with or modify the Library
subject to these terms and conditions. You may not impose any further
restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein.
You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties with
this License.

**10.** 每次你重新分发库（或基于库的任何作品）时，接收者会自动从原始许可方获得许可，以根据这些条款和条件复制、分发、链接或修改库。你不得对接收方行使此处授予的权利施加任何进一步限制。你也不用为强制要求第三方遵守本许可负责。

**11.** If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of
patent infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent
issues), conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order,
agreement or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this
License, they do not excuse you from the conditions of this License.
If you cannot distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your
obligations under this License and any other pertinent obligations,
then as a consequence you may not distribute the Library at all. For
example, if a patent license would not permit royalty-free
redistribution of the Library by all those who receive copies directly
or indirectly through you, then the only way you could satisfy both it
and this License would be to refrain entirely from distribution of the
Library.

**11.** 如果由于法院判决或专利侵权指控或任何其他原因（不限于专利问题），对你施加的条件（无论是通过法院命令、协议还是其他方式）与本许可的条件相矛盾，这也不能成为你不遵循本许可证的理由。如果你不分发就可以同时满足你遵循本许可证下的义务和任何其他相关义务，那么你就根本不要分发本库。例如，如果专利许可不允许所有直接或间接通过你接收副本的人免版税重新分发库，那么你同时满足它和本许可的唯一方法是完全不分发本库。

If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under
any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to
apply, and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other
circumstances.

如果本条规定的任何部分在任何特定情况下被认定为无效或不可执行，则本条款的其余部分将适用，而本条款作为一个整体将适用于其他情况。

It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any
patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any
such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the
integrity of the free software distribution system which is
implemented by public license practices. Many people have made
generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed
through that system in reliance on consistent application of that
system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing
to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot
impose that choice.

本条款的目的不是怂恿你违反任何专利或者其他权利要求，或者与它们抗辩。本条款的目的纯粹是保护自由软件分发系统的完整性，即通过公共许可证来实现。通过一致地应用该分发系统，很多人已经向通过该系统分发的大量软件做出了慷慨的贡献；作者/贡献者也可以决定是否愿意通过其他渠道分发，被授权人无权干涉该决定。

This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to
be a consequence of the rest of this License.

本条款旨在彻底阐明本许可其他条款所带来的当然后果。

**12.** If the distribution and/or use of the Library is restricted in
certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the
original copyright holder who places the Library under this License
may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding
those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among
countries not thus excluded. In such case, this License incorporates
the limitation as if written in the body of this License.

**12.** 如果本程序的分发和/或使用收到一些国家专利或者著作权的限制，权利人可以在通过本许可证授权的软件中明确添加受限的地理范围，以排除那些受限的国家，因此分发仍然可以在其他国家进行。这种情况下，本许可将这些限制纳入许可范围内。

**13.** The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new
versions of the Lesser General Public License from time to time. Such
new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.

**13.** 自由软件基金会可能不时发布通用公共许可证的修订版和/或新版本。此类新版本与当前版本精神上相似，但在描述细节上可能不同，以解决新问题或情况。

Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Library
specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and
"any later version", you have the option of following the terms and
conditions either of that version or of any later version published by
the Free Software Foundation. If the Library does not specify a
license version number, you may choose any version ever published by
the Free Software Foundation.

每个版本都有一个唯一的版本号。如果本库指定了具体的版本号和“任何后续版本”，你可以选择遵守该版本或者后续版本。如果软件没有指定具体的许可证版本号，你可以选择自由软件基金会发布的任何版本。

**14.** If you wish to incorporate parts of the Library into other
free programs whose distribution conditions are incompatible with
these, write to the author to ask for permission. For software which
is copyrighted by the Free Software Foundation, write to the Free
Software Foundation; we sometimes make exceptions for this. Our
decision will be guided by the two goals of preserving the free status
of all derivatives of our free software and of promoting the sharing
and reuse of software generally.

**14.** 如果你希望将本库的部分并于分发条件不同的其他自由软件，应对书面请求作者的许可。对于自由软件基金会拥有著作权的软件，写信给自由软件基金会。我们有时会例外处理。我们的处理此类事情是有两个目标：保持所有自由软件衍生作品的自由属性以及促进软件共享和重用。

**NO WARRANTY**

**免责声明**

**15.** BECAUSE THE LIBRARY IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO
WARRANTY FOR THE LIBRARY, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.
EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR
OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE LIBRARY "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE
LIBRARY IS WITH YOU. SHOULD THE LIBRARY PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME
THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

**15.** 本库免费许可，因此在适用法律范围内不提供品质保证。除非另有书面声明，本库著作权人和/或其他作者按“原样”提供本库，不提供任何形式的显示的或隐式的品质保证，包括但不限于经济价值和适合特定用途的保证。本库的全部品质和性能风险均由你承担。如果本库出现缺陷、你将承担所有必要服务、修复和更正的成本。

**16.** IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN
WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY
AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE LIBRARY AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU
FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE
LIBRARY (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING
RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A
FAILURE OF THE LIBRARY TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER SOFTWARE), EVEN IF
SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGES.

**16.** 在任何情况下，除非适用的法律要求或者书面协议，任何版权方和/或任何按照上述条款修改或/和分发本库的第三方都不对你的损失负责，包括任何一般的、特殊的、偶发的或者重大损失（包括但不限于因你或者第三方，或操作不当、或无法与其他软件错误协同造成的数据丢失，数据失真、失效），即使那些持有方或者其他人已被告知此类损失的可能性。

### END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS

### 条款和条件结束

### How to Apply These Terms to Your New Libraries

### 如何将上述条款应用于你的新库

If you develop a new library, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to the public, we recommend making it free software that
everyone can redistribute and change. You can do so by permitting
redistribution under these terms (or, alternatively, under the terms
of the ordinary General Public License).

如果你开发一个新库，并且希望它尽可能地为公众所用，我们建议将其设为自由软件，让每个人都可以重新分发和更改。你可以通过根据这些条款（或者，也可以根据普通GNU通用公共许可证的条款）允许重新分发来实现。

To apply these terms, attach the following notices to the library. It
is safest to attach them to the start of each source file to most
effectively convey the exclusion of warranty; and each file should
have at least the "copyright" line and a pointer to where the full
notice is found.

要应用这些条款，请将以下通知附加到本库。 最安全的做法是将它们附加到每个源文件的开头，以最有效地传达排除保证的信息； 每个文件都应该至少有“版权”行和一个指向完整通知所在位置的指针。

    one line to give the library's name and an idea of what it does.
    Copyright (C) year  name of author

    一行给出本库的名字和它做什么的想法。 
    
    版权所有 (C) 年份 作者姓名

    This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
    modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public
    License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
    version 2.1 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

    本库是自由软件，你可以根据自由软件基金会发布的GNU宽松通用许可证自由地再分发或者修改。本程序适用第2.1版或者后续版本（具体随你）。

    This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
    Lesser General Public License for more details.

    我们希望本库有用，但是不提供任何保证，甚至不保证它的经济价值或者适合特定目的。具体细节参加GNU宽松通过公共许可证。

    You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
    License along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software
    Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301  USA

    你应当随本程序收到了GNU宽松通用公共许可证的副本，如果没有请致信自由软件基金会：
    51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA

Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper
mail.

同时提供你的电子邮件或者纸质邮件地址。

You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or
your school, if any, to sign a "copyright disclaimer" for the library,
if necessary. Here is a sample; alter the names:

如有必要，你还应该得到你的雇主（如果你是一名程序员）或者学校（如果有的话）签署该本程序的放弃版权声明。如下例所示（你需要修改名字）：

    Yoyodyne, Inc., hereby disclaims all copyright interest in
    the library `Frob' (a library for tweaking knobs) written
    by James Random Hacker.

    Yoyodyne有限公司特此声明放弃由James Random Hacker 编写的库“Frob”（用于调整旋钮的库）的所有版权权益。

    signature of Ty Coon, 1 April 1990
    Ty Coon, President of Vice

    Ty Coon 的签名，1990 年 4 月 1 日
    Ty Coon, 副总裁

That's all there is to it!

全文结束！

--------------------------

翻译：赵振华 zhao.zhenhua@gmail.com

发布日期： 2023年1月23日

地址：<https://github.com/zRich/gpl/blob/main/lgplv2.1/lgplv2.1.pdf>

如有修改建议欢迎发邮件或者到 <https://github.com/zRich/gpl> 讨论。
