 **注：** 本译文作者为赵振华。投稿声明详见关联issue：<https://gitee.com/OpenAtomFoundation/legal-license-translation/issues/I5U3TL> 译文系原样复制于：<https://github.com/zRich/gpl/blob/main/lgplv2.1/lgplv2.1.md>

### GNU LESSER GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE

### GNU 宽松通用许可证

Version 3, 29 June 2007

第3版， 2007年6月29日

Copyright (C) 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
<https://fsf.org/>

版权所有 (C) 2007 自由软件基金会
<https://fsf.org/>

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license document, but changing it is not allowed.

任何人都可以复制和发布本许可证的完整副本，但不允许修改。

This version of the GNU Lesser General Public License incorporates the
terms and conditions of version 3 of the GNU General Public License,
supplemented by the additional permissions listed below.

此版本的 GNU 宽松通用公共许可证包含 GNU 通用公共许可证第 3 版的条款和条件，并辅以下列附加许可。

#### 0. Additional Definitions.

#### 0. 补充定义

As used herein, "this License" refers to version 3 of the GNU Lesser
General Public License, and the "GNU GPL" refers to version 3 of the
GNU General Public License.

如本文所用，“本许可证”指 GNU 宽松通用公共许可证第 3 版，“GNU GPL”指 GNU 通用公共许可证第 3 版。

"The Library" refers to a covered work governed by this License, other
than an Application or a Combined Work as defined below.

“本库”是指受本许可证所管理的涵盖作品，但不包括下文定义的应用程序或组合作品。

An "Application" is any work that makes use of an interface provided
by the Library, but which is not otherwise based on the Library.
Defining a subclass of a class defined by the Library is deemed a mode
of using an interface provided by the Library.

“应用程序”是指任何使用本库提供的接口但不以基于本库的作品。定义本库定义的类的子类被视为使用本库提供的接口的一种方式。

A "Combined Work" is a work produced by combining or linking an
Application with the Library. The particular version of the Library
with which the Combined Work was made is also called the "Linked
Version".

“组合作品”是通过将应用程序与本库组合或链接而产生的作品。制作组合作品的本库的特定版本也称为“链接版本”。

The "Minimal Corresponding Source" for a Combined Work means the
Corresponding Source for the Combined Work, excluding any source code
for portions of the Combined Work that, considered in isolation, are
based on the Application, and not on the Linked Version.

组合作品的“最少相应源代码”是指组合作品的对应源代码，不包括组合作品的任何部分的源代码，这些部分代码基于应用程序而非链接版本的单独计算。

The "Corresponding Application Code" for a Combined Work means the
object code and/or source code for the Application, including any data
and utility programs needed for reproducing the Combined Work from the
Application, but excluding the System Libraries of the Combined Work.

组合作品的“相应应用程序代码”是指应用程序的目标代码和/或源代码，包括从应用程序复制组合作品所需的任何数据和实用程序，但不包括组合作品的系统库。

#### 1. Exception to Section 3 of the GNU GPL.

#### 1. GNU GPL第3条的例外

You may convey a covered work under sections 3 and 4 of this License
without being bound by section 3 of the GNU GPL.

你可以根据本许可证的第 3 条和第 4 条传递涵盖的作品，而不受 GNU GPL 第 3 条的约束。

#### 2. Conveying Modified Versions.

#### 2. 传递修改版

If you modify a copy of the Library, and, in your modifications, a
facility refers to a function or data to be supplied by an Application
that uses the facility (other than as an argument passed when the
facility is invoked), then you may convey a copy of the modified
version:

如果你修改本库的副本，并且在你的修改中，一个设施指的是由使用该设施的应用程序提供的函数或数据（而不是作为调用该设施时传递的参数），那么你可以传达修改版本的副本：

- a) under this License, provided that you make a good faith effort
    to ensure that, in the event an Application does not supply the
    function or data, the facility still operates, and performs
    whatever part of its purpose remains meaningful, or

- a) 根据本许可，前提是你真诚地努力确保，在应用程序不提供函数或数据的情况下，该设施仍在运行，并执行其目的中仍然有意义的任何部分，或

- b) under the GNU GPL, with none of the additional permissions of
    this License applicable to that copy.

-  b)　在 GNU GPL 下，本许可证的任何附加许可均不适用于该副本。

#### 3. Object Code Incorporating Material from Library Header Files.

#### 3. 目标代码包含来自库头文件的材料

The object code form of an Application may incorporate material from a
header file that is part of the Library. You may convey such object
code under terms of your choice, provided that, if the incorporated
material is not limited to numerical parameters, data structure
layouts and accessors, or small macros, inline functions and templates
(ten or fewer lines in length), you do both of the following:

应用程序的目标代码形式可能包含来自作为本库一部分的头文件的材料。你可以根据你选择的条款传递此类目标代码，前提是，如果合并的材料不限于数值参数、数据结构布局和访问器，或小型宏、内联函数和模板（长度不超过 10 行），你执行以下两项操作：

- a) Give prominent notice with each copy of the object code that
    the Library is used in it and that the Library and its use are
    covered by this License.

- a) 在目标代码的每份副本中显着注明其中使用了该库，并且该库及其使用受本许可证的约束。

- b) Accompany the object code with a copy of the GNU GPL and this
    license document.
- b) 随目标代码附上 GNU GPL 副本和本许可证文件。

#### 4. Combined Works.

#### 4. 组合作品

You may convey a Combined Work under terms of your choice that, taken
together, effectively do not restrict modification of the portions of
the Library contained in the Combined Work and reverse engineering for
debugging such modifications, if you also do each of the following:

你可以根据你选择的条款传递组合作品，如果你还执行以下各项，则这些条款合在一起有效地不限制对组合作品中包含的本库部分的修改和用于调试此类修改的逆向工程：

- a) Give prominent notice with each copy of the Combined Work that
    the Library is used in it and that the Library and its use are
    covered by this License.

- a)　在组合作品的每一份副本中都给予明显的通知，说明其中使用了本库，以及本库及其使用受本许可证的约束。

- b) Accompany the Combined Work with a copy of the GNU GPL and this
    license document.

- b) 将 GNU GPL 和本许可证文件的副本与组合作品一起提供。

- c) For a Combined Work that displays copyright notices during
    execution, include the copyright notice for the Library among
    these notices, as well as a reference directing the user to the
    copies of the GNU GPL and this license document.

- c) 对于在执行过程中显示版权声明的组合作品，在这些声明中包含库的版权声明，以及指导用户查看 GNU GPL 和本许可文件副本的参考。

- d) Do one of the following:

- d) 执行下列操作之一

    - 0) Convey the Minimal Corresponding Source under the terms of
        this License, and the Corresponding Application Code in a form
        suitable for, and under terms that permit, the user to
        recombine or relink the Application with a modified version of
        the Linked Version to produce a modified Combined Work, in the
        manner specified by section 6 of the GNU GPL for conveying
        Corresponding Source.

    - 0) 根据本许可的条款和相应的应用程序代码以适合于并根据允许用户重新组合或重新链接应用程序与链接版本的修改版本以产生修改后的组合的形式传递最小对应源 以 GNU GPL 第 6 条指定的方式工作，以传达相应的源代码。

    - 1) Use a suitable shared library mechanism for linking with
        the Library. A suitable mechanism is one that (a) uses at run
        time a copy of the Library already present on the user's
        computer system, and (b) will operate properly with a modified
        version of the Library that is interface-compatible with the
        Linked Version.

    - 1) 使用合适的共享库机制与本库链接。一种合适的机制是 (a) 在运行时使用用户计算机系统上已经存在的本库副本，并且 (b) 将使用与链接版本接口兼容的本库的修改版本正常运行。

- e) Provide Installation Information, but only if you would
    otherwise be required to provide such information under section 6
    of the GNU GPL, and only to the extent that such information is
    necessary to install and execute a modified version of the
    Combined Work produced by recombining or relinking the Application
    with a modified version of the Linked Version. (If you use option
    4d0, the Installation Information must accompany the Minimal
    Corresponding Source and Corresponding Application Code. If you
    use option 4d1, you must provide the Installation Information in
    the manner specified by section 6 of the GNU GPL for conveying
    Corresponding Source.)

- e) 提供安装信息，但前提是根据 GNU GPL 第 6 条要求你提供此类信息，并且仅限于安装和执行通过重组或重新链接生成的组合作品的修改版本所必需的信息具有链接版本的修改版本的应用程序。（如果你使用第4条d款0项，安装信息必须伴随最小对应源和对应的应用程序代码。如果你使用第4条d款1项，你必须按照 GNU GPL 第 6 条规定的方式提供安装信息，用于传递相应源代码。）

#### 5. Combined Libraries.

#### 5. 组合库

You may place library facilities that are a work based on the Library
side by side in a single library together with other library
facilities that are not Applications and are not covered by this
License, and convey such a combined library under terms of your
choice, if you do both of the following:

你可以在一个单一的库中，将基于本库的库功能与其他即不是应用程序也不被本许可证所涵盖的库功能并排放置，
如果遵守下列全部两项，那么你可以根据你选择的条款传递该组合库：

- a) Accompany the combined library with a copy of the same work
    based on the Library, uncombined with any other library
    facilities, conveyed under the terms of this License.

- a) 根据本许可证的条款，在不与任何其他库设施结合的情况下，将基于图书馆的相同作品的副本与组合图书馆一起提供。

- b) Give prominent notice with the combined library that part of it
    is a work based on the Library, and explaining where to find the
    accompanying uncombined form of the same work.

- b) 对组合库给予显着通知，说明它的一部分是基于库的作品，并说明在哪里可以找到同一作品的随附未组合形式。

#### 6. Revised Versions of the GNU Lesser General Public License.

#### 6. GNU 宽松通用许可证的修订版

The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions
of the GNU Lesser General Public License from time to time. Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.

自由软件基金会可能会不时发布 GNU 宽松通用公共许可证的修订版和/或新版。这些新版本在精神上与当前版本相似，但在解决新问题或事项的细节上可能有所不同。

Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Library
as you received it specifies that a certain numbered version of the
GNU Lesser General Public License "or any later version" applies to
it, you have the option of following the terms and conditions either
of that published version or of any later version published by the
Free Software Foundation. If the Library as you received it does not
specify a version number of the GNU Lesser General Public License, you
may choose any version of the GNU Lesser General Public License ever
published by the Free Software Foundation.

每一个版本都有不同的版本号。如果你收到的库指定某个编号版本的 GNU 宽松通用公共许可证“或任何更新版本”适用于它，你可以选择遵循该发布版本或任何更新版本的条款和条件 由自由软件基金会发布。如果你收到的库没有指定 GNU 宽松通用公共许可证的版本号，你可以选择自由软件基金会曾经发布的任何版本的 GNU 宽松通用公共许可证。

If the Library as you received it specifies that a proxy can decide
whether future versions of the GNU Lesser General Public License shall
apply, that proxy's public statement of acceptance of any version is
permanent authorization for you to choose that version for the
Library.

如果你收到的本库指定代理人可以决定 GNU 宽松通用公共许可证的后续版本是否适用，则代理人公开声明的任何版本都永久授权使用本库。

- - -
翻译：赵振华 zhao.zhenhua@gmail.com

发布日期： 2023年1月22日

地址：https://github.com/zRich/gpl/blob/main/lgplv2.1/lgplv2.1.pdf

如有修改建议欢迎发邮件或者到 https://github.com/zRich/gpl 讨论。