 **注：** 本译文作者为赵振华。投稿声明详见关联issue：<https://gitee.com/OpenAtomFoundation/legal-license-translation/issues/I5U3TL> 译文系原样复制于：<https://github.com/zRich/gpl/blob/main/fdl/fdlv1.3.md>

### GNU Free Documentation License

### GNU自由文档许可证

Version 1.3, 3 November 2008

第1.3版, 2008年11月3日

Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002, 2007, 2008 Free Software Foundation,
Inc. <https://fsf.org/>

版权所有(C) 2000, 2001, 2002, 2007, 2008 自由软件基金会
<https://fsf.org/>

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license document, but changing it is not allowed.

任何人都可以复制和发布本许可证的完整副本，但不允许修改。

#### 0. PREAMBLE

### 0. 引言

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
functional and useful document "free" in the sense of freedom: to
assure everyone the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it,
with or without modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.
Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way
to get credit for their work, while not being considered responsible
for modifications made by others.

本许可证的目的是使手册、教科书或其他功能性和有用的文档在自由的意义上“自由”：确保每个人都可以有效地自由复制和重新分发它，无论是否修改它，无论是商业还是非商业。其次，本许可证为作者和出版商保留了一种获得其作品信誉的方式，同时不被视为对他人所做的修改负责。

This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative
works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense. It
complements theGNUGeneral Public License, which is a copyleft
license designed for free software.

本许可证是一种“著佐权”许可证，这意味着文档的衍生作品本身必须在相同意义上是自由的。它补充了GNU通用公共许可证，后者是为自由软件设计的著佐权许可证。

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free
program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the
software does. But this License is not limited to software manuals; it
can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book. We recommend this License
principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.

我们设计此许可证是为了将其用于自由软件的手册，因为自由软件需要自由文档：自由程序应随手册一起提供与软件相同的自由。但本许可不限于软件手册；它可以用于任何文本作品，无论主题如何或是否作为印刷书籍出版。我们推荐此许可证主要用于以指导或参考为目的的作品。

#### 1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

#### 1. 适用性和定义

This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that
contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be
distributed under the terms of this License. Such a notice grants a
world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that
work under the conditions stated herein. The "Document", below, refers
to any such manual or work. Any member of the public is a licensee,
and is addressed as "you". You accept the license if you copy, modify
or distribute the work in a way requiring permission under copyright
law.

本许可证适用于任何手册或其他作品，无论何种介质，只要包含版权持有人的声明，声明可以根据本许可证的条款分发。此类声明授予全球范围内的免版税许可，期限不受限制，可以在此处规定的条件下使用该作品。下面的“文档”是指任何此类手册或作品。公众的任何成员都是被许可人，并被称为“你”。如果你以版权法要求许可的方式复制、修改或分发作品，则你接受本许可证。

A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
modifications and/or translated into another language.

文档的“修改版本”是指包含文档或其任何一部分的文本，无论是逐字复制，还是经过修改和/或翻译成另一种语言。

A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of
the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall
subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall
directly within that overall subject. (Thus, if the Document is in
part a textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain
any mathematics.) The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
them.

“次要部分”是文档的命名附录或前言部分，专门处理文档的发布者或作者与文档的整体主题（或相关事项）的关系，并且不包含任何可能保护整体主题中的内容。（因此，如果文档部分是数学教科书，则中学部分可能不会解释任何数学。）这种关系可能是与主题或相关事物的历史联系，或者是法律、商业、哲学、伦理的问题或关于他们的政治立场。

The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles
are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice
that says that the Document is released under this License. If a
section does not fit the above definition of Secondary then it is not
allowed to be designated as Invariant. The Document may contain zero
Invariant Sections. If the Document does not identify any Invariant
Sections then there are none.

“不变部分”是某些次要部分，其标题被指定为不变部分的标题，在声明文档根据本许可证发布的声明中。如果一个部分不符合上述次要部分的定义，则不允许将其指定为不变的。文档可能包含零个不变部分。如果文档没有识别任何不变部分，那么就没有。

The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed,
as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that
the Document is released under this License. A Front-Cover Text may be
at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may be at most 25 words.

“封面文本”是某些简短的文本段落，作为封面文本或封底文本，在声明文档是根据本许可证发布的声明中列出。封面文本最多5个字，封底文本最多25个字。

A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the
general public, that is suitable for revising the document
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available
drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or
for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input
to text formatters. A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file
format whose markup, or absence of markup, has been arranged to thwart
or discourage subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent.
An image format is not Transparent if used for any substantial amount
of text. A copy that is not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".

文档的“透明”副本是指机器可读的副本，以其规范可供公众使用的格式表示，适用于使用通用文本编辑器或（对于由像素组成的图像）通用绘图直接修改文档程序或（对于绘图）一些广泛使用的绘图编辑器，适用于输入到文本格式化程序或自动翻译为适合输入到文本格式化程序的各种格式。以其他透明文件格式制作的副本，其标记或不存在标记已被安排为阻止或阻止读者进行后续修改，这不是透明的。如果用于任何大量文本，则图像格式不是透明的。不是“透明”的副本称为“不透明”。

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML
or XML using a publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple
HTML, PostScript or PDF designed for human modification. Examples of
transparent image formats include PNG, XCF and JPG. Opaque formats
include proprietary formats that can be read and edited only by
proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD and/or
processing tools are not generally available, and the
machine-generated HTML, PostScript or PDF produced by some word
processors for output purposes only.

透明副本的合适格式示例包括无标记的纯 ASCII、Texinfo 输入格式、LaTeX 输入格式、使用公开可用的 DTD 的 SGML 或 XML，以及为人为修改而设计的符合标准的简单 HTML、PostScript 或 PDF。透明图像格式的示例包括 PNG、XCF 和 JPG。不透明格式包括只能由专有文本处理器读取和编辑的专有格式、DTD 和/或处理工具通常不可用的 SGML 或 XML，以及机器生成的 HTML、PostScript 或由某些文本处理器生成的 PDF 输出目的而已。

The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material
this License requires to appear in the title page. For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title Page" means
the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
preceding the beginning of the body of the text.

“扉页”是指，对于印刷书籍，扉页本身，加上需要清楚地保存本许可证要求出现在扉页中的材料的后续页面。对于没有任何标题页格式的作品，“标题页”是指接近作品标题最显着位置的文本，位于正文开头之前。

The "publisher" means any person or entity that distributes copies of
the Document to the public.

“发布者”是指向公众分发文档副本的任何个人或实体。

A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit of the Document whose
title either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following
text that translates XYZ in another language. (Here XYZ stands for a
specific section name mentioned below, such as "Acknowledgements",
"Dedications", "Endorsements", or "History".) To "Preserve the Title"
of such a section when you modify the Document means that it remains a
section "Entitled XYZ" according to this definition.

“标题XYZ”部分是指文档的命名子单元，其标题恰好是 XYZ，或者在将 XYZ 翻译成另一种语言的文本后的括号中包含 XYZ。（这里的 XYZ 代表下面提到的特定章节名称，例如“致谢”、“贡献”、“批注”或“历史”。）在修改文档时对此类章节“保留标题”意味着它 根据此定义，保留为“标题XYZ”部分。

The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which
states that this License applies to the Document. These Warranty
Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference in this
License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other
implication that these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and has
no effect on the meaning of this License.

该文档可能在声明附近包含品质保证免责声明，声明本许可适用于该文档。这些品质保证免责声明被视为通过引用包含在本许可证中，但仅限于免责保证：这些品质保证免责声明可能具有的任何其他暗示都是无效的，并且对本许可的含义没有影响。

#### 2. VERBATIM COPYING

#### 2. 逐字复制

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies
to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no
other conditions whatsoever to those of this License. You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute. However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies. If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

你可以在任何媒体上以商业或非商业方式复制和分发文档，前提是本许可证、版权声明和声明本许可证适用于文档的许可声明在所有副本中均已复制，并且你不添加任何其他条件 本许可证的那些。你不得使用技术措施来阻止或控制阅读或进一步复制你制作或分发的副本。但是，你可以接受补偿以换取副本。如果你分发了足够多的副本，你还必须遵守第3条中的条件。

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies.

你也可以在上述相同条件下出借副本，并且可以公开展示副本。

#### 3. COPYING IN QUANTITY

#### 3. 复制数量

If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have
printed covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the
Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the
copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover
Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on
the back cover. Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify you
as the publisher of these copies. The front cover must present the
full title with all words of the title equally prominent and visible.
You may add other material on the covers in addition. Copying with
changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve the title of
the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim
copying in other respects.

如果你发布文档的印刷副本（或通常有印刷封面的媒体副本），数量超过100，并且文档的许可通知需要封面文本，你必须将副本附在封面中，封面清晰易读，所有这些 封面文本：封面文本位于封面，封底文本位于封底。两个封面还必须清晰易读地表明你是这些副本的出版商。封面必须显示完整的标题，标题的所有文本都同样突出和可见。你还可以在封面上添加其他材料。仅对封面进行改动的复制，只要保留文档的标题并满足这些条件，在其他方面可以视为逐字复制。

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.

如果任何一个封面所需的文本太多而无法清晰地显示，你应该将列出的第一个（尽可能多）放在实际封面上，然后将其余的放在相邻的页面上。

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent
copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy
a computer-network location from which the general network-using
public has access to download using public-standard network protocols
a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material.
If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps,
when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure
that this Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated
location until at least one year after the last time you distribute an
Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that
edition to the public.

如果你发布或分发数量超过100的文档的不透明副本，你必须在每个不透明副本中包含一个机器可读的透明副本，或者在每个不透明副本中或与每个不透明副本一起声明一个计算机网络位置，通用网络从该位置 - 可以供公开标准网络协议下载文档的完整透明副本，不添加任何材料。如果你使用后一种选择，当你开始大量分发不透明副本时，你必须采取合理谨慎的步骤，以确保此透明副本在你最后一次分发副本后至少一年内仍可在指定位置访问该版本的不透明副本（直接或通过你的代理商或零售商）向公众公开。

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to
give them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the
Document.

我们要求但不要求你在重新分发任何大量副本之前联系文档的作者，以便他们有机会为你提供文档的更新版本。

#### 4. MODIFICATIONS

#### 4. 修改

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under
the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified
Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution
and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy
of it. In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

你可以根据上述第2条和第3条的条款复制和分发文档的修改版本，前提是你也根据本许可发布修改版本，修改版本充当文档的角色，从而许可分发和修改，将修改后的版本提供给拥有它副本的任何人。此外，你必须在修改版本中执行如下：

- A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title
    distinct from that of the Document, and from those of previous
    versions (which should, if there were any, be listed in the
    History section of the Document). You may use the same title as a
    previous version if the original publisher of that version
    gives permission.

- A. 在扉页（以及封面，如果有的话）使用与文档的标题不同的标题，以及与以前版本的标题不同的标题（如果有的话，应该列在文档的历史部分）。如果该版本的原始发布者允许，你可以使用与先前版本相同的标题。

- B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or
    entities responsible for authorship of the modifications in the
    Modified Version, together with at least five of the principal
    authors of the Document (all of its principal authors, if it has
    fewer than five), unless they release you from this requirement.

- B.在扉页上列出，作为作者，负责修改版本中修改的作者的一个或多个个人或实体，以及文档的至少五位主要作者（所有主要作者，如果它少于5），除非他们解除你这个要求。

- C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
    Modified Version, as the publisher.

- C. 在扉页上注明修改版本的出版商名称，作为出版商。

- D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.

- D. 保留文档的所有版权声明。

- E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
    adjacent to the other copyright notices.

- E. 在其他版权声明旁边为你的修改添加适当的版权声明。

- F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license
    notice giving the public permission to use the Modified Version
    under the terms of this License, in the form shown in the
    Addendum below.

- F. 在版权声明之后立即包含一个许可声明，允许公众根据本许可条款使用修改后的版本，格式如下面的附录所示。

- G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant
    Sections and required Cover Texts given in the Document's
    license notice.

- G. 在该许可通知中保留文档许可通知中给出的不变部分和所需封面文本的完整列表。

- H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.

- H. 包括本许可证的未经更改的副本。

- I. Preserve the section Entitled "History", Preserve its Title,
    and add to it an item stating at least the title, year, new
    authors, and publisher of the Modified Version as given on the
    Title Page. If there is no section Entitled "History" in the
    Document, create one stating the title, year, authors, and
    publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page, then add an
    item describing the Modified Version as stated in the
    previous sentence.

- I. 保留标题的“历史”的部分，保留其标题，并向其中添加一个项目，至少说明标题页上给出的修改版本的标题、年份、新作者和出版商。如果文档中没有标题的“历史”的部分，请创建一个说明标题页上给出的文档的标题、年份、作者和发布者的部分，然后添加一个项目来描述上一句中所述的修改版本。

- J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document
    for public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and
    likewise the network locations given in the Document for previous
    versions it was based on. These may be placed in the "History"
    section. You may omit a network location for a work that was
    published at least four years before the Document itself, or if
    the original publisher of the version it refers to
    gives permission.

- J. 保留文档中给出的网络位置（如果有）以便公众访问文档的透明副本，同样保留文档中给出的先前版本所基于的网络位置。这些可以放在“历史”部分。你可以省略至少比文档本身早四年发布的作品的网络位置，或者如果它所引用的版本的原始发布者允许。

- K. For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications",
    Preserve the Title of the section, and preserve in the section all
    the substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements
    and/or dedications given therein.

- K. 对于标题为“致谢”或“奉献”的任何部分，保留该部分的标题，并在该部分中保留每个贡献者致谢和/或其中给出的奉献的所有内容和语气。

- L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered
    in their text and in their titles. Section numbers or the
    equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.

- L. 在文本和标题中保留文档的所有不变部分。条目编号或等效物不被视为节标题的一部分。

- M. Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements". Such a section may
    not be included in the Modified Version.

- M. 删除任何标题为“批注”的部分。此类部分可能不会包含在修改版本中。

- N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled
    "Endorsements" or to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.

- N. 不要将任何现有部分重新命名为“批注”或与任何不变部分的标题冲突。

- O. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.

- O. 保留任何保修免责声明。

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material
copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all
of these sections as invariant. To do this, add their titles to the
list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice.
These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

如果修改后的版本包括新的前言部分或附录，这些部分或附录有资格作为次要部分并且不包含从文档中复制的材料，你可以选择将这些部分中的部分或全部指定为不变的。为此，将它们的标题添加到修改版本的许可通知中的不变部分列表中。这些标题必须与任何其他章节标题不同。

You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains
nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a
standard.

你可以添加一个标题为“批注”的部分，前提是它只包含各方对你的修改版本的批注——例如，同行评审声明或该文本已被组织批准为标准的权威定义。

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list
of Cover Texts in the Modified Version. Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
through arrangements made by) any one entity. If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or
by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

你可以在修改版本的封面文本列表末尾添加一段最多5个字的封面文本，以及一段最多25个单词的封底文本。任何一个实体只能添加（或安排）一段封面文本和一段封底文本。如果文档已经包含相同封面的封面文本，由你之前添加的或由你代表的同一实体做出的安排，则你不得添加另一个；但你可以替换旧的，前提是获得添加旧版本的前任发布者的明确授权。

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License
give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or
imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

文档的作者和发布者不根据本许可证授权使用其名称进行宣传或主张或暗示对任何修改版本的认可。

#### 5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS

#### 5. 合并文档

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and
list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its
license notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.

你可以根据上述第4条中针对修改版本定义的条款，将本文档与根据本许可证发布的其他文档组合在一起，前提是你在组合中包括所有原始文档的所有不变部分，不加修改，并将它们全部列出作为你组合作品在其许可声明中的不变部分，并且你保留它们的所有的保修免责声明。

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy. If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but
different contents, make the title of each such section unique by
adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

合并后的作品只需包含本许可证的一个副本，多个相同的不变部分可以用一个副本替换。如果有多个名称相同但内容不同的不变部分，则通过在其末尾添加该部分的原作者或出版商的名称（如果已知）在括号中使每个此类部分的标题唯一，或者唯一编号。对组合作品的许可声明中的不变部分列表中的章节标题进行相同的调整。

In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled "History"
in the various original documents, forming one section Entitled
"History"; likewise combine any sections Entitled "Acknowledgements",
and any sections Entitled "Dedications". You must delete all sections
Entitled "Endorsements".

合并时，必须将多份原始文件中任何题为“历史”的部分合并为一个题为“历史”的部分；同样合并任何标题为“致谢”的部分，以及任何标题为“奉献”的部分。你必须删除所有标题为“批注”的部分。

#### 6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

#### 6. 文件收集

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other
documents released under this License, and replace the individual
copies of this License in the various documents with a single copy
that is included in the collection, provided that you follow the rules
of this License for verbatim copying of each of the documents in all
other respects.

你可以制作一个由文档和根据本许可证发布的其他文档组成的集合，并将各种文档中的本许可证的各个副本替换为集合中包含的单个副本，前提是你遵循本许可证的条款在所有其他方面逐字复制每份文件。

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and
distribute it individually under this License, provided you insert a
copy of this License into the extracted document, and follow this
License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of that
document.

你可以从此类集合中提取单个文档，并根据本许可证单独分发它，前提是你将本许可证的副本插入提取的文档中，并在有关逐字复制该文档的所有其他方面遵循本许可证。

#### 7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

#### 7. 与独立作品聚合

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate
and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, is called an "aggregate" if the copyright
resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the legal rights
of the compilation's users beyond what the individual works permit.
When the Document is included in an aggregate, this License does not
apply to the other works in the aggregate which are not themselves
derivative works of the Document.

如果汇编作品的版权不用于限制合法权利，则将文档或其衍生品与其他单独和独立的文档或作品汇编在存储或分发介质中或之上，称为“集合” 编辑的用户超出了个别作品所允许的范围。当文档包含在集合中时，本许可不适用于集合中的其他作品，这些作品本身不是文档的衍生作品。

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one half of
the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on
covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the
electronic equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic form.
Otherwise they must appear on printed covers that bracket the whole
aggregate.

如果第3条的封面文本要求适用于文档的这些副本，那么如果文档少于整个总数的一半，则文档的封面文本可以放在将文档括在集合中的封面上，或者如果文件为电子形式，则为封面的电子等价物。否则，它们必须出现在包含整个集合的印刷封面上。

#### 8. TRANSLATION

#### 8. 翻译

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
original versions of these Invariant Sections. You may include a
translation of this License, and all the license notices in the
Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you also include
the original English version of this License and the original versions
of those notices and disclaimers. In case of a disagreement between
the translation and the original version of this License or a notice
or disclaimer, the original version will prevail.

翻译被认为是一种修改，因此你可以根据第4条的条款分发文档的翻译。用翻译替换不变部分需要获得其版权所有者的特别许可，但除了这些不变部分的原始版本。你可以包括本许可证的翻译、文档中的所有许可证通知以及任何保证免责声明，前提是你还包括本许可证的原始英文版本以及这些通知和免责声明的原始版本。如果本许可证或通知或免责声明的翻译版本与原始版本之间存在分歧，则以原始版本为准。

If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements",
"Dedications", or "History", the requirement (section 4) to Preserve
its Title (section 1) will typically require changing the actual
title.

如果文档中的某个部分标题为“致谢”、“贡献”或“历史”，则保留其标题的要求（第4条）通常需要更改实际标题（第1条）。

#### 9. TERMINATION

#### 9. 终止

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document
except as expressly provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise
to copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute it is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.

除非本许可证明确规定，否则你不得复制、修改、再许可或分发文档。任何以其他方式复制、修改、再许可或分发它的尝试都是无效的，并将自动终止你在本许可下的权利。

However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your license
from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a) provisionally,
unless and until the copyright holder explicitly and finally
terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright holder
fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonable means prior to
60 days after the cessation.

但是，如果你停止所有违反本许可的行为，那么你从特定版权所有者获得的许可将被恢复 (a) 临时，除非并直到版权所有者明确并最终终止你的许可，以及 (b) 永久，如果版权所有者未能在停止后60天之前通过某种合理的方式通知你违规行为。

Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is
reinstated permanently if the copyright holder notifies you of the
violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have
received notice of violation of this License (for any work) from that
copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after
your receipt of the notice.

此外，如果版权持有人通过某种合理方式通知你违规行为，则你从特定版权持有人处获得的许可将永久恢复，这是你第一次从该版权持有人处收到违反本许可（对于任何作品）的通知，并且你在收到通知后30天内纠正违规行为。

Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate the
licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from you under
this License. If your rights have been terminated and not permanently
reinstated, receipt of a copy of some or all of the same material does
not give you any rights to use it.

根据本条终止你的权利不会终止根据本许可从你那里收到副本或权利的各方的许可。如果你的权利已被终止且未永久恢复，则收到部分或全部相同材料的副本并不赋予你使用它的任何权利。

#### 10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

#### 10. 本许可证的后续修订版

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the
GNU Free Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions
will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in
detail to address new problems or concerns. See
<https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

自由软件基金会可能会不时发布GNU自由文档许可证的新修订版本。这些新版本在精神上与当前版本相似，但在解决新问题或事项的细节上可能有所不同。请参阅 <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>。

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this
License "or any later version" applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation. If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document specifies
that a proxy can decide which future versions of this License can be
used, that proxy's public statement of acceptance of a version
permanently authorizes you to choose that version for the Document.

许可证的每个版本都有一个不同的版本号。如果文档指定本许可证的特定编号版本“或任何更新版本”适用于它，你可以选择遵循该指定版本或已发布的任何更新版本的条款和条件（不作为草案）由自由软件基金会。如果文档未指定此许可证的版本号，你可以选择自由软件基金会曾经发布的任何版本（不是草稿）。如果文档指定代理人可以决定可以使用本许可证的哪些未来版本，则该代理人接受某个版本的公开声明将永久授权你为文档选择该版本。

#### 11. RELICENSING

#### 11. 再许可

"Massive Multiauthor Collaboration Site" (or "MMC Site") means any
World Wide Web server that publishes copyrightable works and also
provides prominent facilities for anybody to edit those works. A
public wiki that anybody can edit is an example of such a server. A
"Massive Multiauthor Collaboration" (or "MMC") contained in the site
means any set of copyrightable works thus published on the MMC site.

“大型多作者协助站点”（Massive Multiauthor Collaboration Site，“MMC站点”）是指发布受版权保护的作品并为任何人编辑这些作品提供重要设施的任何万维网服务器。任何人都可以编辑的公共wiki就是这种服务器的一个例子。网站中包含的“大规模多作者协作”（或“MMC”）是指在MMC网站上发布的任何受版权保护的作品。

"CC-BY-SA" means the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0
license published by Creative Commons Corporation, a not-for-profit
corporation with a principal place of business in San Francisco,
California, as well as future copyleft versions of that license
published by that same organization.

“CC-BY-SA”是指由知识共享组织发布的 Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 许可证，这是一家有重要商业地位、位于加利福尼亚州旧金山的非营利性公司，此许可证的未来著佐权版本也由该组织发布。

"Incorporate" means to publish or republish a Document, in whole or in
part, as part of another Document.

“合并”是指作为另一份文件的一部分全部或部分发布或重新发布一份文件。

An MMC is "eligible for relicensing" if it is licensed under this
License, and if all works that were first published under this License
somewhere other than this MMC, and subsequently incorporated in whole
or in part into the MMC, (1) had no cover texts or invariant sections,
and (2) were thus incorporated prior to November 1, 2008.

如果MMC是根据本许可证获得许可的，并且如果所有最初根据本许可证在本MMC以外的地方发布并随后全部或部分合并到MMC中的作品，则 (1) 没有 封面文本或不变部分，并且 (2) 因此在2008年11月1日之前合并。

The operator of an MMC Site may republish an MMC contained in the site
under CC-BY-SA on the same site at any time before August 1, 2009,
provided the MMC is eligible for relicensing.

MMC站点的运营商可以在2009年8月1日之前的任何时间在同一站点上根据CC-BY-SA重新发布该站点中包含的MMC，前提是该MMC有资格获得重新许可。

### ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents

### 附录：如何将此许可证用于你的文档

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and
license notices just after the title page:

要在你编写的文档中使用此许可证，请在文档中包含一份许可证副本，并将以下版权和许可证声明放在标题页之后：

    Copyright (C)  YEAR  YOUR NAME.

    版权所有 (C) 年份 作者姓名

    Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
    under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
    or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
    with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
    A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
    Free Documentation License".

    根据GNU自由文档许可证第1.3版或自由软件基金会发布的任何更新版本的条款，授予复制、分发和/或修改本文档的权限；不包括不变的部分，封面文本，也包括封底文本。该许可证的副本包含在标题为“GNU自由文档许可证”的部分中。

If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover
Texts, replace the "with...Texts." line with this:

如果有固定部分、封面文本和封底文本，请将“XXX清单”替换为相应内容：

    with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the
    Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST.

    不变部分的标题清单，封面文本清单，封底文本清单。

If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other
combination of the three, merge those two alternatives to suit the
situation.

如果你有封面文本包含不变部分，或者这三者的其他组合，请合并这两个选项以适应这种情况。

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as theGNUGeneral Public License, to
permit their use in free software.

如果你的文档包含重要的程序代码示例，我们建议你根据你选择的自由软件许可证（例如GNU通用公共许可证）并行发布这些示例，以允许它们在自由软件中使用。

--------------------------

翻译：赵振华 zhao.zhenhua@gmail.com

发布日期： 2023年1月23日

地址：<https://github.com/zRich/gpl/blob/main/fdl/fdl1.3.pdf>

如有修改建议欢迎发邮件或者到 <https://github.com/zRich/gpl> 讨论。
